---
layout: exam_info
num: e02
ready: true
desc: "Midterm exam - II "
exam_date: 2019-02-28 3:30:00.00-8
---

* * *

## Exam logistics

**Thursday, 2/28** in the regular lecture classroom at the usual lecture time
* Exam begins exactly at the start of the lecture - **Please start arriving 5-10 minutes before class**

You may bring only one 8.5" x 11" piece of paper with notes on both sides.

*    No books, calculators, phones, laptops or other materials or devices are allowed during the exam.
*    There are no makeups for this exam.
*    You must take the exam during the section you are registered in, unless you pre-arrange an alternative with the instructor.

* * *

## Open Review Session

The Open Review Session will be **in HFH 1104 from 6-9PM on Monday, Feb 25th.** 
Tutors will go over practice problems.
Feel free to stop by at any time during that interval to ask for help with any of the topics or practice problems.



Have fun practicing what you've learned so far!

Remember: **programming is not a spectator's sport** -- you have to actively write code in order to get better at writing, reading, and debugging it.


* * *


# Midterm 2 Topics

* Makefiles
  * What is the purpose?
  * What goes into compiling?
    * Compiling vs linking
  * Three main parts of a Makefile
    * Target, dependencies, command
  * What is the syntax of a makefile?
  * Flags in makefiles
* Fine IO
  * Cin, cout, what are they good for?
  * Ifstream and ofstream
    * How to create?
    * How to open a file? How to close?
    * How to read from file?
    * How to use getline()? Difference from get()?
    * How to iterate through entire file
* Arrays
  * What are they? Why use them?
  * Can you mix different types within same list?
  * Index of first element -- 0 or 1?
  * How do you deal with an array's size?
    * Ex. in a function call
  * How do you create an array? How do you add to an arrary? How to read from an array? How to loop through an array?
  * Bounds of an array
  * How do you pass in / work with arrays in functions?
  * **trace/write code involving arrays and showing program dynamics via pointer diagrams**
* Header files
  * What are they? Why do we use them?
  * .h files vs .cpp files
  * What goes into a .h file? What doesn’t?
  * How do you use #include statements to import files? 
    * including library vs. your code
* Testing/Debugging
  * Stubs -- what are they?
  * What are preconditions / postconditions? Why do we need them?
  * Debugging Strategies
* Counting in new Bases
  * What is base 2?
  * How to convert base 10 to base 2? And the other way around?
  * What is octal? 
  * What is hexadecimal?
  * What is "positional notation"?
  * How do you “group the bits” to make converting easier?
  * Why is this all useful? Why not just use base ten?
* C strings vs. C++ strings
  * What is the difference?
  * Why use one instead of the other?
  * What is the null character? Why is it important?
  * Char[] type
* Pass by value vs reference
  * What is the difference? When should we use one over the other?
  * swapvalue() using pass by reference vs value
    * What are references?
    * What are the differences between pointers and references (when would you use each and why)?
  * What is the & character?
  * How do you pass by reference to a function?
  * Can references change the variables they are assigned to?
  * Can we use pointers instead of references?
* Pointers
  * What are they? Why useful? What do they hold?
  * How do we create a pointer?
    * How do we point a pointer to a different variable?
    * initialization to null value, initialization using ‘&’ operator
  * What is the dereferencing operator? What does it do? Why do we use it?
  * How are pointers and arrays linked?
    * What is pointer arithmetic?
  * How do you make two pointers point to the same object? How do you change where a pointer points to?
  * pointer diagrams showing relationship between pointer and pointee
  * **trace/write code involving arrays and showing program dynamics via pointer diagrams**
* Structures
  * What are they? Why do we use them?
  * How do you define a struct as a data type?
  * What are some examples? Can you write one from scratch?
  * How to create Pointers to structure (declaration and initialization)
  * How do we access member variables?
    * When you access member vars using the dot (.) operator? When would you use an arrow (->) instead?
  * Structs inside structs
    * How to access member vars of structs inside structs
  * Passing structs to functions by value, address and reference
  * **trace/write code involving arrays and showing program dynamics via pointer diagrams**

* * *

# Practice Problems

For these problems, we recommend that you run through this code "on paper", try to figure out what the output should be, then run the code and compare the answers.
Understand why the computer produced the answer you saw, and look closer at why your answer might not match what the computer provided.

### Question 1: Pointer Basics
Write the output for each scenario and create pointer diagrams for each. 
(You can check PythonTutor for C++ to see how each case is stored in memory).
a)
```cpp
int p1;
p1 = 3;
cout << 3 << endl;
cout << p1 << endl;
```
b)
```cpp
int *p2;
p2 = &p1;
cout << *p2 << endl;
cout << p2 << endl;
```
c)
```cpp
int p3;
int *p4;
p3 = 6;
//cout << *p4 << endl; //what happens here? why would you _want_ this commented? 
p4 = p2;
p2 = &p3;
cout << *p2 << endl;
cout << *p4 << endl;
```

### Question 2: All Roads Point to....Rome?
Write the output of the following:
```cpp
int main(){
  char rome = 'r';
  char venice = 'v';
  char genoa = 'g';
  char *romeptr = &rome;
  char *veniceptr = &venice;
  char *genoaptr = &genoa;
  cout << *romeptr << endl;
  cout << *veniceptr << endl;
  cout << *genoaptr << endl;
  veniceptr = genoaptr;
  cout << *veniceptr << endl;
  *romeptr = 'g';
  genoaptr = romeptr;
  cout << *romeptr << endl;
  cout << *genoaptr << endl;
  cout << *veniceptr << endl;
  return 0;
}
```

### Question 3: Get to the Point!
Write the output of the following:
```cpp
int main() {
  char letter1 = 'a';
  char letter2 = 'b';
  char letter3 = 'c';
  char *point1 = &letter1;
  char *point2 = &letter2;
  char *point3 = &letter3;
  cout << *point1 << endl;
  cout << *point2 << endl;
  cout << *point3 << endl;
  point2 = point1;
  cout << *point2 << endl;

  letter1 = 'c';
  point3 = point1;
  cout << letter1 << endl;
  cout << *point2 << endl;
  cout << *point3 << endl;
  return 0;
}
```

### Question 4: Reference Parameters
Write the output of the following:
```cpp
void increment1(int x, int y){
    x++;
    y++;
    cout << x << endl;
    cout << y << endl;
    return;
}
void increment2(int &x, int &y){
    x++;
    y++;
    cout << x << endl;
    cout << y << endl;
}
int main(){
    int a = 6;
    int b = 10;
    increment1(a,b);
    cout << a << " " << b << endl;
    increment2(a,b);
    cout << a << " " << b << endl;
}
```

* Write `increment3()` using pointers.

### Question 5: A Malfunctioning Function
What is wrong with the function below?
```cpp
// The function is supposed to swap the values of the passed arguments. 
swap(int x, int y){
    x = y;
    y = x;
    cout << x << endl;
    cout << y << endl;
}
int main(){
    int a = 12;
    int b = -4;
    swap(a,b);
    cout << a << " " << b << endl;
}
```
What is the output of this program? Why?

What do we need to do to correct it?

### Question 6: Pointer Ping-Pong

Consider the following code:
```cpp
int num1 = 3;               //line 1
int num2 = 1;               //line 2
int *ptr1 = &num1, *ptr2=0; //line 3
*ptr1 = num2;               //line 4
ptr2 = ptr1;                //line 5
*ptr2 = *ptr1 + num2;       //line 6
```

a. Draw a pointer diagram to show the state of memory after the first three lines of the above code are executed. Assume num1 is at memory address 0x0001 and num2 is at memory address 0x0002.

b. Copy your pointer diagram from part(a). Now modify it to show the effect of executing lines 4 through 6.

### Question 7: Line by line, character by character (ifstream)

Write a function `numLines` whose parameters are a filename and a character, that prints out the number of lines in the file that start with the character passed in.
If we have a file "sample1.txt" with contents:

    Apple 
    pen
    align
    Store
    Alias
    student A
    
Calling `numLines("sample1.txt", 'A')` should print `2` in the terminal.
You can assume that the `<fstream>` library has been included.



### Question 8: Pointers / References (and which variables change after function call)

Consider this `trickyFunction` and a short program that calls it:

```cpp
void trickyFunction(int* a, int* b, int& c, int d) {
    *a = *a + 1;
    b = b + 1;
    c = c + 1;
    d = d + 1;
}

int main() {
    int w = 10, x = 10, y = 10, z = 10;
    trickyFunction(&w, &x, y, z);
    cout << w << “, ” << x << “, ” <<  y  <<“, ” <<  z <<endl;
    return 0;
}
```

* In the call to trickyFunction, which variables among w,x,y,z are called by value?
* In the call to trickyFunction, which variables among w,x,y,z are called by reference?
* What is the output of the above code?


### Question 9: Robotic Number Conversions

A Cyborg-Robot is taking a test. After taking the test, the Robot receives the score of '0xAC3'. Unfortunately, for our robot friend, they can only read in binary. What is '0xAC3' in binary?

Suppose the Cyborg-Robot uses quantum computing, meaning that they use ternary values (base 3). Our Cyborg-Robot now sees that they got '10121' in their base 3 system. What is '10121' base 3 in decimal?


### Question 10: Structs and Pointers

A pet will be represented by the following struct:

```c++
struct Pet{
    string name;    // name of pet
    string species; // ex: dog, cat, etc.
    double weight;  // weight of pet
};
```

Implement the two functions below.

`nameOfHeavierPet()` will take two pointers to Pet objects as input and print the name of the pet that weighs more. If either of the pointers are null, print `"invalid Pet"` and exit. If both pets weigh the same, print `"same weight"`.
```c++
void nameOfHeavierPet(Pet *p1, Pet *p2);
```

`numCats()` will take in an array of Pet and the array size. Count the number of Pet objects where species = "cat". Return the count.
```c++
int numCats(Pet pets[], int length);
```
For example, let's pretend we have an array `pets` like so:
```c++
Pet pets[] = { {"Buddy", "dog", 34.5}, {"Snowball", "cat", 10.2}, {"Oreo", "cat", 8.7} };
cout << numCats(pets, 3); // should print 2
```


### Question 11: Array iteration with for-loops

Write the implementation of a function ‘getSmallestOdd’ that takes two arguments: an integer array and the length of that array. Your function should find and return the lowest odd number in the array. If there are no odd numbers in the array then return -1. You may assume the array does not contain negative numbers. Remember to account for an empty array.


### Question 12: Arrays in memory

Consider the code given below. Assume that the array nums is created at the location `0x8000`, which means the address of `nums[0]` is `0x8000`. Also assume that an integer takes up 4 bytes, so the memory location of the next element would be 4 bytes greater than the starting address.

```cpp
void arrStuff (int x[], int len)
{
    cout << x << “, “ << *x << ”, “ << x+1<< ”, “ << *(x+1) << endl;
    *x = *x+1;
}

int main(){
  const int VAL=2;
  int nums[ ] = {40,10,-60,25};
  arrStuff(nums, 4);
  for(int i=0; i< VAL; i++){
    cout<<nums[i]<<” “;
  }
  return 0;
}
```

a) Draw a pointer diagram that shows all the variables in memory when the function `arrStuff` is called and **only the first line** has been executed. Your pointer diagram should show the `nums` array, the arguments of `arrStuff()` and any relationships between them.

b) What is printed to standard output when the program is executed? You may represent each value that is printed in hex or decimal notation as convenient. You must include the output produced by the cout statements in `arrStuff()` and `main()`


### Question 13: Structs and functions

Consider the following struct definitions: 

```cpp
struct Point{ 
    double x;
    double y;
};
struct Box{ 
    Point ul; // upper left corner of the Box double width; //width of the Box 
    double height; //height of the Box 
}; 
```

The following function is designed to initialize the member variables of a Box object.

```
void initBox(Box* p, double x, double y, double width, double height);
```
Consider the following code: 
```cpp
Box b1;
Box &b2 = b1;
Box* b3 = new Box;

```
Using the function definition from above, state whether each of the following lines of code results in a compilation error or not. Write RE (for run-time error), CE (for compile-time error) or NE (for No Error).

```
(a) initBox(b1, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(b) initBox(*b1, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(c) initBox(&b1, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(d) initBox(b2, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(e) initBox(&b2, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(f) initBox(b3, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4); 
(g) initBox(&b3, 10.0, 20.0, 2, 4);

```


### Question N: Reading from a file
 
```cpp
filestream.cpp
#include <iostream>
#include <string>
#include <fstream>
using namespace std;

int main()
{
    ifstream ins;
    string nextline;
    string filename = "students.txt";

    ins.open(filename);
    if (ins.fail())
    {
        cerr << "Unable to open the file " << filename << endl;
        return -1;
    }

    while (!ins.eof()) {
        ins >> nextline;
        cout << nextline << endl;
    }
    ins.close();

    return 0;
}
```

The input file <tt>students.txt</tt> contains:

       Arthur
       Jaqui
       Surya

What is the output of running the above program? (Try running it yourself.)

* What is happening with the output?
* What needs to change to make it correctly read the file?

* * * 

**Make sure to look at the example problems that we did on the quizzes as well as the code that was shown in lectures. 
Please be sure to review the code from lecture, which can be found in the lecture notes (different from lecture slides).**
