---
num: "h07"
desc: "Chapter 9: Dynamic memory allocation"
ready: false
assigned: 2018-11-20 12:30:00.00-8:00
due: 2018-11-28 12:30:00.00-8:00
---
Read Chapter 6, Chapter 9, sections 9.1-9.2 (pages 508 - 533). The key learning goals are dynamic memory allocation and its use in dynamic arrays and linked-lists. Please turn in the physical copy of your homework in person. Write in PEN or DARK PENCIL.

<b>PLEASE MARK YOUR HOMEWORK CLEARLY, REGARDLESS OF IF YOU WRITE IT OUT IN INK OR PENCIL! FOR BEST RESULTS, SAVE THIS PAGE AS A PDF, THEN PRINT THE PDF.</b>

1.(10 pts) What is the output of the following program? Using a pointer diagram show the evolution of all data objects in memory, clearly marking elements on the run-time stack and on the heap. Mark the size of all data objects. Assume the code is embedded in a correct and complete program.
<div markdown="1">
```cpp
int *p1, *p2, *p3;
p1 = new int;
p2 = new int;
p3 = p1;
*p1 = 20;
*p2 = 30;
cout<< *p1<< " "<< *p2<<" "<<*p3<< endl;
p1 = p2;
cout<< *p1<< " "<< *p2<<" "<<*p3<< endl;
*p3 = *p2;
cout<< *p1<< " "<< *p2<<" "<<*p3<< endl;
```
</div>

<div style="margin-bottom:2em"></div>

2.(10 pts) What is the output of the following program? Using a pointer diagram show the evolution of all data objects in memory, clearly marking elements on the run-time stack and on the heap. Mark the size of all data objects. Assume the code is embedded in a correct and complete program.
<div markdown="1">
```cpp
int array_size = 4, *a ;
a = new int[array_size];
int *p = a;
for(int i=0; i< array_size; i++)
    *(a+i) = 2*i;
p[0] = 10;
for(int i=0; i< array_size; i++)
    cout<<a[i]<<" ";
cout<<endl;
```
</div>

<div class="pagebreak"></div>


3.(10 pts) Write the definition of a structure type called UndergradStudents. This structure should contain student ID numbers, first and last names, major, and GPA scores for each undergraduate year.
<div style="margin-bottom:8em"></div>

4.(20 pts) Write a program that uses the definition of the structure UndergradStudents from the previous question to *declare* and then *initialize* an array of 3 objects of this structure (hint: you can do this with the same approach you define/initialize an array of any other type). You **must initialize the values in the program, not by user input**.  The initial values are shown in the table below. Then write the definition of a function with the signature <code> void printRecords(struct UndergradStudents *records, int numrecords);</code> The function should print out the values of the array of objects passed to it as shown in the sample below, along with each student's AVERAGE GPA score (calculated to a precision of 2 decimal places). You **must use a loop to print the output**. Your program should appropriately call the printRecords() function to print the student records and the average GPA.

<div markdown="1">
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---
|ID | First name| Last Name| Major | GPA Yr1|  GPA Yr2| GPA Yr3| GPA Yr4
|1 | Joe | Shmoe | EE | 3.8 | 3.3 | 3.4 | 3.9
|2 | Macy | Chen | CS | 3.9 | 3.9 | 4.0 | 4.0
|3 | Peter | Patrick | ME | 3.8 | 3.0 | 2.4 | 1.9

OUTPUT:

```
These are the student records:
ID# 1, Shmoe, Joe, Major: EE, Average GPA: 3.60
ID# 2, Chen, Macy, Major: CS, Average GPA: 3.95
ID# 3, Peter, Patrick, Major: ME, Average GPA: 2.77
```
