---
num: "h05"
desc: "Chapter 5: Call by value and call by reference "
ready: true
assigned: 2018-11-01 12:30:00.00-7:00
due: 2018-11-07 12:30:00.00-8:00
---
{% include no_staples_box.html %}
Read Chapter 5.1 thru 5.4. Read the lecture slides for topics on binary arithmetic.  You don't need to turn this homework in. To earn credit for this homework, complete the corresponding quiz on gauchospace AFTER you have completed the pen and pencil version of the homework. The quiz will be available one day before the due date indicated on the homework.

<b>PLEASE MARK YOUR HOMEWORK CLEARLY, REGARDLESS OF IF YOU WRITE IT OUT IN INK OR PENCIL!<br/>
FOR BEST RESULTS, PRINT THIS PAGE AS A PDF, THEN PRINT THE PDF</b>



1.(3 pts) What happens if you forget the return statement in a void-function?
<div style="margin-bottom:8em"></div>

2.(3 pts) Can you define a function in the body of another function? And can you call a function in the body of another function?
<div style="margin-bottom:8em"></div>

3.(2 pts) What is the difference between a call-by-reference function and a call-by-value function? As a programmer, when might you decide to use one over the other?
<div style="margin-bottom:6em"></div>

4.(4 pts) Write a void-function definition for a function called "zero_both" with 2 parameters, both which are variables of type int, and sets the value of both variables to 0. Describe if you picked this function to be a call-by-reference or a call-by-value AND WHY?
<div style="margin-bottom:12em"></div>
<div class="pagebreak"></div>
5.(2 pts) What is the value of the concepts of pre-condition and post-condition to programmers?
<div style="margin-bottom:6em"></div>


6.(4 pts) What are two important testing strategies covered in the book?
<div style="margin-bottom:6em"></div>

7.(6 pts) What is the output of the program below (write it in the space to the right)?

<div markdown="1">
```cpp
#include <iostream>
using namespace std;

void phooey(int &z) {
  z = z / 2;
  cout << "z=" << z << endl;
  }

int main() {
  int b = 3;
  phooey(b);
  cout << "b=" << b << endl;
  return 0;
  }
```
</div>

8.(2 pts) What is the meaning of the ampersand character (&) in the code above?
<div style="margin-bottom:6em"></div>

