---
num: "h09"
desc: "Chapter 14: Recursion"
ready: false
assigned: 2018-05-25 9:00:00.00-8:00
due: 2018-06-08 23:59:00.00-7:00
---
{% include no_staples_box.html %}
Read Chapter 14 and the lecture notes. You don't need to turn this homework in. To earn credit for this homework, complete the corresponding quiz on gauchospace AFTER you have completed the pen and pencil version of the homework. The quiz will be available one day before the due date indicated on the homework..

<b>PLEASE MARK YOUR HOMEWORK CLEARLY, REGARDLESS OF IF YOU WRITE IT OUT IN INK OR PENCIL! FOR BEST RESULTS, SAVE THIS PAGE AS A PDF, THEN PRINT THE PDF.</b>

1.(2 pts) How does a recursive function know when to stop recursing?
<div style="margin-bottom:8em"></div>

2.(3 pts) What is a LIFO scheme and how does it relate to stacks?
<div style="margin-bottom:8em"></div>

3.(3 pts) What is stack overflow?

<div class="pagebreak"></div>

<div markdown="1">
4.(15 pts) Copy the binary search function found at this URL:
https://github.com/ucsb-cs16-wi17/hw14

It has a few mistakes: fix them and get the program to work correctly. I recommend you do this by examining the code, compiling it, see what errors come up, then edit the code, and repeat the process until you have it working.
Do NOT turn in the completed, fixed program. Instead write out in bullet points in the space below, EVERYTHING you had to fix to get the program working.
<div style="margin-bottom:16em"></div>

5.(15 pts) Write a recursive function program to find the *n*th element in the following arithmetic numerical sequence: **3, 11, 27, 59, 123, ...**

Hint: You first have to figure out what is the recursive pattern. You also have to identify the base case.



</div>